In the last video, we show how
a description can be translated
into a mathematical formulation
of an optimization problem.
Personally, I believe that there is a lot
of value in creating these formulations
before using optimization
software to solve the problem.
However, the reality is that many analysts
go directly from the problem description
to the software, and
skip the formulation step.
Either way you do it, ultimately,
these optimization models
require specialized software.
Our optimization software is embedded
in the Analytic Solver Platform and
it operates on a spreadsheet
model of the problem.
So in this video, we are going to develop
a spreadsheet model that can be used for
the optimization of
the transportation problem.
Locate and open the Excel file
titled Transportation Problem-Data.
This file contains a spreadsheet with
the problem data shown in a single table.
The values in C6 to
F10 are the transportation costs
from each supplier to each customer.
The values in G6 to G10
are the capacity of each supplier.
And the values in C11
to F11 are the demands.
The first thing that we're going to do is
to select the entire table and copy it.
We're then going to paste it on B13.
Change the title of the new
table from Data to Model.
Delete all the data values so we can
enter the appropriate Excel functions.
Select the range C16 to G21 and
hit the Delete key.
Our 20 decision variables will
be in the range from C16 to F20.
In our models,
we have been using light gold to indicate
that the cells are decision variables.
So we select the decision variable
range and click on light gold.
The values for the decision variables will
be determined by the optimization process.
But it is good practice
when building models to
enter some values to help us verify
that our spreadsheet model works.
So enter the solution that I showed to
you in the introduction to this module.
In that solution, supplier A sends
its 50 units to customer 4.
Therefore, enter 50 in cell F16.
Supplier B sends 20 units to customer
2 and 20 units to customer 3.
Enter 20 in cell D17 and 20 in E17.
Supplier C sends its 60
units to customer 1.
Enter 60 in C18.
Supplier D sends 15 units to customer
1 and 15 units to customer 3.
Enter 15 in cell C19 and 15 in cell E19.
Finally, supplier E sends 5 units
to customer 2 and 15 to customer 4.
So enter 5 in D20 and 15 in F20.
We have a complete solution, but
we need to verify that it is feasible.
A feasible solution is one that
satisfies all the constraints.
Let's first see if the solution
satisfies the capacity constraints.
We first change the title from
Capacity to Shipped in cell G14.
The cells in the range from
D16 to D20 will contain
the total number of units
shipped from each supplier.
To calculate what a supplier ships,
add all the quantities that
are shipped to all the customers.
This can be done with the sum function.
Go to cell G16 and enter =sum(,
and select the range C16 to F16 and
close the parentheses.
Cells G16 should now show 50.
Select G16 and
copy the cell down to G20 by dragging
it from the bottom right corner marker.
The amounts shipped should not
exceed the supplier capacities shown
on the data table.
This tells us that
the solution is feasible with
respect to the capacity constraints.
We are now going to verify that
the demand constraints are satisfied.
We start by changing the title
Demand in B21 to Received.
Then, in cell C21,
use again the function sum to calculate
the total number of units
that customer 1 will receive.
Enter =sum(, then select the range
C16 to C20 and close parentheses.
Then, copy the formula by dragging it from
the bottom right corner of C21 to F21.
The values received by
the customers should be
at least as large as the demand
values on the data table.
This means that the solution
is also feasible with respect
to the demand constraints.
Now we only need to add
the objective function.
Recall that the objective in the model
is to find a feasible shipment
that minimize the total cost.
Also recall that we calculated the total
cost as the sum of the products
of unit shipped multiplied
by cost per unit.
Excel includes a very useful function
to calculate this in one step.
The function is called sumproduct.
Go to cell B23 and enter Total Cost.
Then go to cell C23 and
enter =sumproduct( and
first select the cost
in the range C6 to F10.
Enter a comma, and
then select the shipments in cells C16
to F20 and close parentheses.
After pressing Enter,
you will see that the function correctly
calculates the total cost of 1085.
As the last step, we will add some useful
formatting to the objective function,
and we will also define names for
the cells in our model.
Select cells B23 and C23 and add borders,
and select C23 and
add a light orange background.
This is the color that we have used
throughout the course to indicate
output cells.
Select the range G6 to G10,
click the name box at the left end of
the formula bar, and type Capacity.
Select the range C11 to F11,
click the name box, and type Demand.
Select the range C16 to F20,
click the name box, and type Shipments.
Select the range G12 to G20,
click the name box, and type Shipped.
Select the range C21 to F21,
click the name box, and type Received.
And then select the cell C23,
click the name box, and type Total_Cost.
Our spreadsheet model is able to evaluate
the total cost of any set of shipments.
We just need to change the values
of the decision variables.
And the spreadsheet
calculates the total cost and
updates the quantities shipped and
received.
We could do some
What-If Analysis in this way.
But it wouldn't be practical to try
to find the minimum cost solution
by manually changing the shipment values.
There are just way too many
shipment combinations.
Fortunately, there is software
that can help us with this.
In the next video,
we will learn how to add optimization
to this spreadsheet model.